February in Arctic Norway the days are
short and it's 30 degrees below zero
this time of year every Sami family must
round up the reindeer and drive them
into a Corral
it's a health check to sort out those
not fit enough to make the long
migration later in spring
old and worn teeth means the reindeer
will be sold for slaughter for meat and
hide the profit from reindeer herding
good teeth mean a respite at least until
next year this is meat on Ella's mother
and Inga's aren't she lives the sami
life with passionate enthusiasm ella and
Inga have grown up absorbing this
passion for the Arctic and for these
hearty resilient reindeer this far north
it's too cold and too tough for cows or
sheep only a creature that evolved
during the Ice Age can really be at home
in these harsh landscapes but reindeer
are more than just arctic farm animals
to survive here they need their wild
instincts for this partnership to work
the Sami have had to adapt to the
reindeers way of life as much as the
reindeer have adapted to the Sami in the
past the Sami used reindeer for
everything from food and clothing the
transport and money they were nomads
following their herds living in reindeer
skin tents called Lavos reindeer are
still at the heart of Sami life though
the Sami have moved with the times
mate orals family live in Celtic a know
a modern Sammy tonin arctic Norway but
many people still think of the Sami has
locked in the past we joke with them
that we don't have cars and we drive
only with reindeers but we are just
normal people ok not so normal but we
are still known